# Spring-Boot-Rest-API
Requirements
1. Maven 3.0+

2. IDE(Eclipse or IntelliJ)

3. JDK 1.8+

4. MYSQL database server

5. Postman for testing

Overview
Create the Spring Boot Project from Spring Initializr
Create MYSQL database and define Database configurations
Create Entity model class
Create JPA Data Repository
Create Service class
Create Rest Controllers class
Build and Run the Project
Testing using Postman
1.Create the Spring Boot Project from Spring Initializr
Create a REST service with Spring Initializr.
Artifact: The name of the folder

Group: The root package name to use

Add the following dependencies:
WEB
JPA (Java Persistence API)
3.MYSQL
.Create a MySQL database and define Database configurations
Create a database to store user data to create, update, delete, and get all the user information using REST API.

--Define connection properties in /src/main/resources/application.properties

spring.datasource.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/[DATABASE_NAME]
spring.datasource.username=[SQL_DATABASE_USERNAME]
spring.datasource.password=[SQL_DATABASE_PASSWORD]

3.Create Entity model class
Create the User model class to map with the Users table.
@Entity is used to annotate that the class is an entity in the database. @Tableis used to annotate the name of the table in the database. @GeneratedValue is used to generate strategies for the values of primary keys.

Let's break down the code in the file:

@Entity annotation specifies that this Java class is mapped to the database table.
@Table with the help of the property name specifies which particular table this class is mapped to.
@Column on each Java instance variable allows defining a set of properties like name, length etc. The name property will be the name of the field in the database table that this instance variable will map to.
@Id on a field tells Spring Boot that this particular field is the primary key in the table
@GeneratedValue specifies the strategy that will be used for generating primary keys.

There are four primary key generation strategies as described below:


GenerationType.AUTO - This is the default strategy used by Spring Boot. If you use this strategy, the JPA provider will decide on an appropriate strategy to generate the primary key depending on the dialect given in the application.properties file.
GenerationType.IDENTITY - this strategy uses the database identity column to determine the primary key strategy. For example, you defined the emp_id column as auto-increment in the database while creating the table. Now when you use this strategy then a unique primary key is generated by starting from 1 and incrementing every time a new row is inserted in the table.
GenerationType.SEQUENCE - this strategy uses database sequence to generate the primary keys.
GenerationType.TABLE - this strategy uses a database table to generate primary keys.

4.Create JPA Data Repository
Create User Repository interface extending JPA Repository.
There are built-in methods for CRUD operations in JpaRepository, writing any SQL query is not needed.

The @Repository on the class indicates that the class is a data repository that will contain CRUD operations. CRUD is an acronym that stands for the four basic operations of the database - Create, Read, Update, Delete.

The Repository extends JpaRepository. You have two parameters passed to the JpaRepository - first parameter is the model class that will be managed by this repository, second is the data type of the primary key.

The JpaRepository interface provided by Spring Data JPA makes it possible for the repository class to retrieve, update, delete records in the employee table.

This interface also defines methods such as save(), findAll() , delete(), to operate on the database. The implementation of these methods is provided by the default implementation class called SimpleJpaRepository. You have to make a call to these methods thus saving you from writing queries for these operations.

5.Create Service class
Create a User service class to code the business logic and it acts as a middle layer between repository and controller class.
@Transactional used to annotate methods are executed in transactions.

In Spring, you use @Autowired annotation for instantiating a class object.

The @Repository annotation from the EmployeeRepository class enabled the creation of a bean of this class through the @ComponentScan feature of Spring. This bean is then used in the service class using @Autowired annotation. This is called Dependency Injection in Spring.
The createEmployee method calls the empRepository.save() function, which will return the Employee object after saving it to the database. The parameter passed to the createEmployee method is the Employee model containing all the details to save.
Similarly, getEmployees() and deleteEmployee() call the respective JpaRepository methods extended by EmployeeRepository.
The findAll() function returns the list of all employee details in the database.
The deleteById(empId) function will delete an employee record where the emp_id in the table is equal to the empId passed.

The updateEmployee method accepts two parameters - an employee ID (primary key) and the employee object containing the new employee details.
To update an existing employee, you’ll first retrieve the employee object where employee ID in the database equals empId and store it in the emp variable.
After getting the old employee object, you’ll use the setters defined in Employee.java to update the fields with new values stored in employeeDetails.
Lastly, the empRespository.save(emp) function will save the updated emp object to the database.

6.Create Rest Controllers class
Create Rest User Controllers class which contains all REST API endpoints for CRUD operations.

@RequestMapping annotation on the class defines a base URL for all the REST APIs created in this controller. This base URL is followed by individual REST endpoints given to each of the controller methods.
@RestController on the class is a combination of:
@Controller - tells Spring Boot that this class is a controller.
@ResponseBody - indicates that the return value of the methods inside the controller will be returned as the response body for the REST API.
EmployeeService is injected as a dependency using @Autowired annotation.

7.Build and Run the Project
The app will start running at http://localhost:8080.
 mvn spring-boot:run 
 
8. Testing using Postman
Execute POST Request method to add a user to the Database.
Execute the GET Request method to get all users from the Database.
Execute GET Request method along with id to get specific user details from the Database.
Note: if User given id is found in the database server, it will respond with HTTP status OK(200),Else if no user is found with the given id, it returns HTTP status Not Found (404).

Execute PUT Request method along with ID to update the user with id 1.
Note: Check the database in MySQL Workbench wether the data has been updated from database or Execute GET Request method along with id.

Execute the DELETE Request method along with ID to delete the user with id 1.

